_drafts/Cyberpunk-Dystopia-00.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: "What is a Cyberpunk Dystopia? - How to Not Live in a Cyberpunk Dystopia #00"
date: 2024-01-21 16:00:00 -0700
tags: politics right-to-repair cyberpunk
--- 

This post is targeted towards a general audience. No prior knowledge is required. 


Cyberpunk, in this context, refers to a setting in which there's high tech (that's the cyber) and the tech is used as a means of exerting power over disadvantaged people. Technology is an indiscriminate force multiplier. Corporations, unchained from regulations by either their absence or their lack of enforcement, fully utilize this to expand their influence, often weakening or supplanting local governments. This weakening of local governments is not a new idea. It's been done by economic means since there's been accumulation of wealth, and industrialization only made it easier. The thing that makes it cyberpunk is the further acceleration of this practice by computers.

The indiscriminate nature of technology also lends it to being the tool of the people. The only computer we know how to make is what we call a Turing machine, a computer that can run any program. Software and hardware can be designed to make it arbitrarily difficult to run some types of programs, but you can't make it impossible for a computer to run certain types of programs under any circumstances. This means that no matter how hard corporate engineers try to make it so that you can only use their proprietary software, or their compatible proprietary hardware, technology is always hackable. 

Hacking in this case is not just the act of compromising someone else's computer. In the context of this article series, and most often as used by hackers, means modifying technology to function in a way not intended by its creators.

Commit message:

Created draft of cyberpunk post 3

_drafts/Cyberpunk-Dystopia-00.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: "What is a Cyberpunk Dystopia? - How to Not Live in a Cyberpunk Dystopia #00"
date: 2024-01-21 16:00:00 -0700
tags: politics right-to-repair cyberpunk
--- 

This post is targeted towards a general audience. No prior knowledge is required. This is the first post in a series about what we can do to make real life less of a cyberpunk dystopia. 

Cyberpunk, in this context, refers to a setting in which there's high tech (that's the cyber) and the tech is used as a means of exerting power over disadvantaged people. Technology is an indiscriminate force multiplier. Corporations, unchained from regulations by either their absence or their lack of enforcement, fully utilize this to expand their influence, often weakening or supplanting local governments. This weakening of local governments is not a new idea. It's been done by economic means since there's been accumulation of wealth, and industrialization only made it easier. The thing that makes it cyberpunk is the further acceleration of this practice by computers.

The indiscriminate nature of technology also lends it to being the tool of the people. The only computer we know how to make is what we call a Turing machine, a computer that can run any program. Software and hardware can be designed to make it arbitrarily difficult to run some types of programs, but you can't make it impossible for a computer to run certain types of programs under any circumstances. This means that no matter how hard corporate engineers try to make it so that you can only use their proprietary software, or their compatible proprietary hardware, technology is always hackable. 

Hacking in this case is not just the act of compromising someone else's computer. In the context of this article series, and most often as used by hackers, hacking means modifying technology to function in a way not intended by its creators. It can be as complicated as replacing the firmware on your printer, or as simple as using a universal remote to emulate the remote that came with your TV. Hacking is modification beyond the intended use of an object. Some would say hacking is freedom. 

The essence of cyberpunk is the tension between the overwhelming power of corporations that command technology and the power of the everyday person to fight back by modifying that same technology, as well as creating and sharing their own. Cyberpunk *dystopia* is when in this setting, the power distribution becomes so unbalanced that corporations are allowed to enforce nearly unfettered oppression in the name of ever-increasing profits. 

An example of this is what [Cory Doctorow calls the Darth Vader MBA](https://pluralistic.net/2023/08/03/there-is-no-cloud/): "I have altered the deal, pray I don't alter it any further." When corporations are allowed to violate the terms of their own agreements without consequence, but still able to enforce their agreements on people, those people are left with few options but to hope they don't get screwed again.
