_drafts/Linux-for-Mere-Mortals.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: "Linux for Mere Mortals"
date: 2024-01-26 22:00:00 -0700
tags: linux right-to-repair
categories: drafts
hidden: true
--- 

If your technological journey has led you to wondering what the deal is with Linux, 
but it all seems like a bit too much to take in, this is for you. 

## Linux has an attitude problem 
I won't hesitate to acknowledge that the Linux community (and to be honest, computer science in general)
has a problem with being elitist and/or ableist. The Linux community at large
especially has an issue with looking down on users of other operating systems. 
It's time we do better. We're all in it together, and we should act like it. 
This guide is constructed with existing attitudes in mind, and as an attempt 
at improving them. EndeavourOS was selected because it's beginner-friendly in both 
design and community. 

## What will Linux do for me?

### Your computer gets faster for free! 
How is this possible? It's because Linux has less overhead than Windows or MacOS. 
Overhead, in this case, means programs that the operating system runs in the 
background. When you start up your PC, before you even open any programs, Windows 
uses 2.3 GB of RAM. Linux, on the other hand, uses (INSERT AMOUNT). The exact 
amount varies based on your customization, but it will always be less. 

### Installing programs is easier


Outline: 
- Less overhead (your computer gets faster for free)
- Package managers 
- No bloatware 
- Escape from capitalism 
- Your system is yours (no constant UI changes just to make things shiny)

Commit message:

Reordered sections and worked on package manager section

_drafts/Linux-for-Mere-Mortals.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: "Linux for Mere Mortals"
date: 2024-01-26 22:00:00 -0700
tags: linux right-to-repair
categories: drafts
hidden: true
--- 

If your technological journey has led you to wondering what the deal is with Linux, 
but it all seems like a bit too much to take in, this is for you. Alternatively, 
if you're fed up with the alternatives (Windows or MacOS), this is also for you.


## What will Linux do for me?

### Your computer gets faster for free! 
How is this possible? It's because Linux has less overhead than Windows or MacOS. 
Overhead, in this case, means programs that the operating system runs in the 
background. When you start up your PC, before you even open any programs, Windows 
uses 2.3 GB of RAM. Linux, on the other hand, uses (INSERT AMOUNT). The exact 
amount varies based on your customization, but it will always be less. 

### Installing programs is easier
The most important innovation that Linux brings to consumers is a **package manager**. 
Software is divided into different **packages**, and a package manager is a program
that provides a centralized way to install and remove software. While most package
managers are command line only, and the command line can be scary, package managers
are uncomplicated. 

On Windows, you might click through graphical installer to install a program. Sometimes, 
these have boxes you have to uncheck to prevent the installer from installing additional
garbage. On a package manager like `apt`, you might just run the command 
`apt install program`, then it installs. Easy as that, no additional garbage. 


## Addendum: Linux has an attitude problem 
I won't hesitate to acknowledge that the Linux community (and to be honest, computer science in general)
has a problem with being elitist and/or ableist. The Linux community at large
especially has an issue with looking down on users of other operating systems. 
It's time we do better. We're all in it together, and we should act like it. 
This guide is constructed with existing attitudes in mind, and as an attempt 
at improving them. EndeavourOS was selected because it's beginner-friendly in both 
design and community. 

Outline: 
- Less overhead (your computer gets faster for free)
- Package managers 
- No bloatware 
- Escape from capitalism 
- Your system is yours (no constant UI changes just to make things shiny)
